[Amit Varma]: I've always believed in the principle that two consenting adults have the right to engage
[Amit Varma]: in any voluntary transaction as long as it does not infringe on the rights of any other
[Amit Varma]: individual and I believe this to be true whether that interaction takes place in the bedroom
[Amit Varma]: or in the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: One of the saddest things about the way ideologies are formed in our modern times is that personal
[Amit Varma]: freedoms and economic freedoms are treated as two separate things but I believe that
[Amit Varma]: they are at their heart the exact same right and the exact same expression of our autonomy
[Amit Varma]: as human beings.
[Amit Varma]: Many people especially on the left give personal freedoms such as the freedom of speech the
[Amit Varma]: respect they deserve but not so much economic freedom and it is often vice versa on the
[Amit Varma]: right and in India these distinctions of left and right don't really apply and most political
[Amit Varma]: parties don't give either kind of freedom the respect they deserve.
[Amit Varma]: It is the worst of both worlds and a particularly telling illustration of this is the way India
[Unknown]: treats its street vendors.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian state's core function should be to be a protector of its citizens but instead
[Amit Varma]: it is most often a predator and a parasite.
[Amit Varma]: Nowhere is this more apparent than in the case of street vendors.
[Amit Varma]: People sell on the streets because people want to buy from them.
[Amit Varma]: Every voluntary transaction leaves both parties better off and so society benefits from this
[Amit Varma]: exchange and yet our street vendors are routinely harassed and exploited and preyed upon and
[Amit Varma]: are often too powerless to fight back.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today to speak on this subject is Prashant Narang, a lawyer and legal expert
[Amit Varma]: who works at the Center for Civil Society in Delhi which has fought for the rights of
[Amit Varma]: street vendors in India for many, many years.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin our conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who not only loves to read but also wants to write better?
[Amit Varma]: If so, I have something for you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April this year, I've been teaching an online course called the art of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Our webinars spread out over four Saturdays in which I share whatever I've learnt about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of writing over 25 years as a professional writer.
[Amit Varma]: The course also contains many writing exercises, discussions on email and WhatsApp and much
[Amit Varma]: interactivity.
[Amit Varma]: It costs rupees 10,000 or 150 dollars.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the details at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: This link will be in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and the words on the
[Amit Varma]: page, then the art of clear writing might be just what you need.
[Amit Varma]: July batches begin on Saturday, July 4th.
[Amit Varma]: So hurry and register before then at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Prashant, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So Prashant, you know, before we sort of get to the subject at hand, tell me a little bit
[Guest]: about your journey.
[Guest]: My journey, I am a first generation lawyer, but also a first generation graduate.
[Guest]: And I come from a family of traders, you know, family of retailers.
[Guest]: My family is also a family of Punjabi refugees, grandparents migrated from, you know, some
[Guest]: parts of Pakistan in 47, 48.
[Guest]: Prashant was really a partition child, because he was born here, but probably conceived there.
[Guest]: And you know, I come from that kind of a family where daughters are more educated than sons.
[Guest]: And most of my cousins barely finished their schooling.
[Guest]: And for me to take that step, you know, take that decision to go to college and take up
[Guest]: a vocational course or even then think about law.
[Guest]: So law was something that I'd never thought before.
[Guest]: And I did a professional course after my 12th, and then joined Dad's business, you know,
[Guest]: departmental store.
[Guest]: And it was only in 2005-06, I was thinking of doing some sort of masters, I was not too
[Guest]: sure what.
[Guest]: And I ended up attending a CCS seminar on public policy.
[Guest]: I wasn't too sure of, you know, what it will be about.
[Guest]: But there, you know, someone suggested to me that I should think about law and I'll
[Guest]: be a good lawyer.
[Guest]: I don't think whether, you know, I was really not sure whether I should, I should not.
[Guest]: But I prepared for the entrance exam and I got admission in Delhi University, age was
[Guest]: no bar for Delhi University.
[Guest]: That's one of very few places, you know, you can join law at any age.
[Guest]: So that happened.
[Guest]: It was only in my first semester, I realized that I loved law so much.
[Guest]: You know, it was a similar feeling what you saw probably on Amir Khan's face in Three
[Guest]: Idiots movie when I was sitting in the engineering class.
[Guest]: So that kind of enjoyment and, you know, the feeling of joy I had.
[Guest]: I love my constitutional law classes, jurisprudence classes.
[Guest]: So that's how it happened.
[Guest]: But in terms of other influences, you know, life has been set of contrasts.
[Guest]: So I have been into two kinds of schools.
[Guest]: One is a missionary school, but also a school run by Sangh RSS.
[Guest]: The other set of contrast is I have been in JNU, but also in Center for Civil Society.
[Guest]: I worked there.
[Guest]: The next set of contrast is that I studied law in a state run university, Delhi University,
[Guest]: but also in a very elite private university, Jindal Global Law School.
[Guest]: And these are the diverse experiences that influenced and shaped my journey.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, you know, like you said, you came from a family of traders
[Amit Varma]: and you were a trader at one point yourself where you were helping your dad with his business.
[Amit Varma]: And the thought that comes to mind is that, did that then shape very crucially how you
[Amit Varma]: look at the law and the constitution?
[Amit Varma]: Because it seems to me that there is a danger in people who are born among the elites, who
[Amit Varma]: are then, you know, live an elite life, go abroad, and, you know, do law at Columbia
[Amit Varma]: or wherever, and they come back, and they are looking at the constitution in a very
[Amit Varma]: theoretical framework, upar upar se, whereas you actually have a better lived idea of how
[Amit Varma]: laws intersect with the everyday daily lives of citizens.
[Amit Varma]: Would you say that that's sort of a factor in shaping you?
[Guest]: I couldn't agree more, because you see Rohit Dey's book, People's Constitution, for the
[Guest]: first time, we, you know, have a book that documents the struggles of, you know, people
[Guest]: at the bottom of the pyramid, their struggles and how they use the constitution.
[Guest]: And I don't find it surprising that most of the stories are about economic freedom, you
[Guest]: know, about their struggles with earning their livelihood.
[Guest]: Not a single story there is about freedom of speech and expression or about other fundamental
[Guest]: rights.
[Amit Varma]: It's all about economic freedom.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like in the minds of many people, there's almost like this frightening disconnect,
[Amit Varma]: where they will support freedom when it comes to personal freedoms, like the freedom of
[Amit Varma]: speech and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But they will not understand that the same freedom should apply to all interactions two
[Amit Varma]: people have with each other.
[Amit Varma]: So if we are two consenting adults, it should have the same moral value if someone stops
[Amit Varma]: us either from sleeping with each other, or from trading in the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a certain kind of left liberal view that voluntary action is to be respected
[Amit Varma]: as it should be if it is happening in a bedroom and it's a personal interaction, but not if
[Amit Varma]: it's in the marketplace, where suddenly it becomes something entirely different and their
[Amit Varma]: coercion is justified, intervention is justified.
[Amit Varma]: And that's almost, in a sense, written into the DNA of our constitution and our laws,
[Amit Varma]: where some freedoms are respected more than others, while all of them arise essentially
[Amit Varma]: from the same source.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I agree.
[Guest]: I think for them, I mean, for left liberals, the sense of morality and legality differs
[Amit Varma]: for personal freedom and for economic freedom.
[Amit Varma]: Yep.
[Amit Varma]: So one of the things which you're obviously, you've been involved deeply in and which we're
[Amit Varma]: talking about now in this episode is sort of street vendors, which is something the
[Amit Varma]: Center for Civil Society, where you work now and have worked for many, many years has been
[Amit Varma]: involved with for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me sort of how you got to, you know, this specific subject, per se, and what were
[Amit Varma]: your early learnings from it, interactions with it?
[Guest]: Actually, during my law school, I never took up any internship with any law firm.
[Guest]: And I was looking at the issue of auto rickshaw drivers in Delhi.
[Guest]: And, you know, there were different kinds of policy responses to the problem of auto
[Guest]: rickshaw driver.
[Guest]: The problem was, commuters often complain that they don't go by meter.
[Guest]: And policy response was that we need to discipline them.
[Guest]: How you discipline them is either you have a digital meter, you have workshop for them,
[Guest]: you prescribe a uniform for them, they have to have GPS, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And at times, you know, you hear, and you read in the newspapers that there is a cultural
[Guest]: issue, they are migrants, they don't know how to behave with commuters, so on and so
[Guest]: forth.
[Guest]: So, while I was in law college, I with my other friends, we investigated, we did some
[Guest]: research and found out that it was more a policy issue, because of the disparity between
[Guest]: demand and supply.
[Guest]: And there was a permit system, the government didn't issue any further permits.
[Guest]: So, this was one issue that we studied.
[Guest]: And we, you know, made a documentary called third wheel, a shorter version of this documentary
[Guest]: still available on YouTube, it's called third wheel.
[Guest]: Right after finishing my LLB, I joined a lawyer, Miss Indira Unnayar.
[Guest]: And I assisted her in another public interest matter, which was about cycle rickshaw pullers.
[Guest]: And same issue, very similar, there was a permit issue, you know, fixed number of permits
[Guest]: and the government didn't issue further permits.
[Guest]: And the number of permit was limited to 99,000.
[Guest]: But there were actually 6 lakh cycle rickshaw pullers in Delhi, which meant more than 5
[Guest]: lakh cycle rickshaw pullers were illegal.
[Guest]: And that give an opportunity to the municipal officials, traffic police to basically seek
[Guest]: rent.
[Guest]: So, on 10th of February 2010, Delhi High Court decided in favor of cycle rickshaw pullers.
[Guest]: And basically, you know, the so called mafia became entrepreneurs.
[Guest]: And I found that really very interesting.
[Guest]: That was around the same time CCS was probably doing Jeevika campaign related to street vendors
[Guest]: in Rajasthan.
[Guest]: I took up masters after that.
[Guest]: And it was only in 2013 that I joined CCS, CCS was already doing street vendors project
[Guest]: by then.
[Guest]: And they had an office in Jaipur, Rajasthan, and the street vendor associations knew them
[Guest]: quite well.
[Guest]: So there was a PIL pending before these High Court of Rajasthan with respect to this issue.
[Guest]: And Rajasthan passed a state law for protection of street vendors, but it was totally a toothless
[Guest]: law.
[Guest]: A lot of other organizations as well as street vendor organizations were advocating for a
[Guest]: central law.
[Guest]: And if you remember, UP had a National Advisory Council, they began to have consultations,
[Guest]: I think in right from 2009, 2010.
[Guest]: And finally, the Central Act came in 2014.
[Guest]: Also the Supreme Court passed its orders and asked, you know, the Parliament, I mean, the
[Guest]: Supreme Court asking the Parliament to come up with a law, a federal law to tackle a municipal
[Guest]: level subject.
[Guest]: So these were my experiences with livelihoods of urban poor and similar issues, be it auto
[Guest]: rickshaw drivers, be it cycle rickshaw pullers, or be it street vendors.
[Guest]: The issue is state harassment, you know, the harassment caused by police, by municipal
[Guest]: officials and permit and license against at the core of it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we get down into the nitty gritties of the problems that street vendors
[Amit Varma]: face and all of that one sort of final broad question, which is also about something that
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned, you know, a brief while ago about the economic way of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And is it the case that like when you describe the cycle rickshaw pullers in Bombay and all
[Amit Varma]: the policy responses, which were all horrible, and all the other popular sort of responses
[Amit Varma]: people had to that which are equally horrible.
[Amit Varma]: And the key thing that they're missing there, obviously, is that people respond to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And if you have a system where the incentives are absolutely horrible, then everyone will
[Amit Varma]: behave rationally, and you'll get really bad outcomes.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if you have your x number of rickshaw pullers, but you're giving licenses,
[Amit Varma]: which are point 2x, then obviously, you will have that rent seeking, you will have bribery
[Amit Varma]: and the cost for society go up massively.
[Amit Varma]: So has that been like, it seems to me that that's a fundamental challenge at the core
[Amit Varma]: of either making government work well, or even how we look at other issues in isolation,
[Amit Varma]: be it the constitution or legality itself, that people don't understand this fundamental,
[Amit Varma]: and I won't even call it the economic way of thinking, because that seems to imply that
[Amit Varma]: there is something niche about it, which doesn't apply to everything.
[Amit Varma]: Because economics is a study of human behavior, we all obviously respond to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a fundamental fact you have to take into account.
[Amit Varma]: And if you don't, none of your other thinking or intervention will work.
[Amit Varma]: So has that been a big challenge with you both in terms of changing mindsets, and then
[Amit Varma]: in terms of actually getting things done?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: You're right.
[Guest]: Because if you look at the judgments related to cycle rickshaw pullers, or street vendors,
[Guest]: you know, especially in 80s, I would say 50s and 60s were not that bad.
[Guest]: The judges did what they were supposed to, but it was in 80s that you see the problems
[Guest]: in the judgment.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, when we talk about cycle rickshaw pullers, the judgment that
[Guest]: Delhi High Court passed, and it's stuck down some of the provisions that apply to cycle
[Guest]: rickshaw pullers in Delhi.
[Guest]: Those provisions were challenged four times in 80s before the Supreme Court and the Supreme
[Guest]: Court upheld those provisions.
[Guest]: And if you see those judgments, and if you see the rationale that the court gives, heavily
[Guest]: influenced by socialist reasoning, and they mentioned this, and they call the entrepreneurs
[Guest]: who own the cycle rickshaws, and so basically, let me first give you the background of what
[Guest]: the law was about.
[Guest]: There was another law which said that one person can't own more than one cycle rickshaw.
[Guest]: So owner must be the puller, which meant that you can only own one cycle rickshaw, you will
[Guest]: not give it on rent, but which also implied that no one else can hire a cycle rickshaw
[Guest]: from the other person.
[Guest]: Now, there were a lot of migrants who came from rural areas during the non-agriculture
[Guest]: season, and would come to cities and towns, and would hire cycle rickshaws, and would
[Guest]: ply them and then probably after three, four months, will go back to villages.
[Guest]: But when you prohibit, when you make it illegal to give it on rent or to hire cycle rickshaws,
[Guest]: you are basically, by sort of intervention, you are attacking the economy, you are making
[Guest]: that consensual transaction illegal.
[Guest]: Their reasoning is that, you know, the person who owns more than one cycle rickshaw is a
[Guest]: greedy capitalist, and they say that in their judgments.
[Guest]: Now that judgment, those four judgments, look at the contrast between those four judgments
[Guest]: and the Delhi High Court judgment where this time in 2010, the court calls the police,
[Guest]: you know, the harasser or the exploiter.
[Guest]: So in 80s, the exploitation is done by so-called greedy capitalists.
[Guest]: And in 2010, same issue, same problem, same law, and the court finds that it is the police
[Amit Varma]: and the municipal officials who are exploiting the poor.
[Amit Varma]: So let me sort of unpack this.
[Amit Varma]: One is that to summarize what is wrong with that earlier socialist judgments of the 80s,
[Amit Varma]: for example, just let's unpack that one clause that no one can own more than one cycle rickshaw.
[Amit Varma]: What does it do?
[Amit Varma]: Number one, it prohibits scale.
[Amit Varma]: It means that if you get one cycle rickshaw and you're successful and you want to scale
[Amit Varma]: up, you cannot do that, you're only allowed to own one.
[Amit Varma]: Number two, it is an entry barrier.
[Amit Varma]: If you want to be a cycle rickshaw puller, you have to then get the means to actually
[Amit Varma]: own one.
[Amit Varma]: It is illegal for you to drive one for somebody else.
[Amit Varma]: And presumably, if you rent one against the law, then both you and the person you're renting
[Amit Varma]: it from will have to pay bribes to the police concerned or whatever and do other jugaad
[Amit Varma]: to get out of it.
[Amit Varma]: The third aspect is that with restrictions like this, there is often the moralistic line
[Amit Varma]: taken that, you know, it goes against a man's dignity to pull a cycle rickshaw.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, for their own good, we should keep them away from it.
[Amit Varma]: Where, again, what people fail to realize is that, yes, pulling a cycle rickshaw is
[Amit Varma]: just an horrible job, you wouldn't wish it on anyone.
[Amit Varma]: But everybody who is choosing to do so of his own free will, is doing so because it
[Guest]: is the best option to him.
[Amit Varma]: So you are actually condemning him to a life worse than that by taking away the best option
[Amit Varma]: of employment open to him.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of wrong for all these three reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Another question that popped up when you were talking about the disparity between the 1980s
[Amit Varma]: and the 2010 judgment, which you pointed out, which, you know, correctly, then shifts of
[Amit Varma]: focus on police and municipal officials for their harassment.
[Amit Varma]: Is that one is actually a two part question one, has it actually been a trend within the
[Amit Varma]: judiciary?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it an isolated instance of an opinion changing like this, from something less liberal
[Amit Varma]: to more liberal, as we would call it?
[Amit Varma]: And two, does the culture of a particular time determine the direction of court judgments
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that do judges then feel a necessity to do a certain kind of posturing to get the
[Amit Varma]: plaudits of their peers and, you know, their others in society?
[Guest]: Well, that would require empirical research.
[Guest]: There is some empirical research, you know, what you're saying, Deirdre McCloskey has
[Guest]: argued something similar.
[Guest]: And Nimish Adia, who did his PhD under McCloskey.
[Guest]: In his PhD thesis, he talks about something similar, you know, in the context of economic
[Guest]: reforms India had in 1991.
[Guest]: He says it was, you see the society changing.
[Guest]: And he points out at the, you know, for example, the Bollywood movies.
[Guest]: So you look at how capitalists were portrayed in the movies, in 50s, 60s, then suddenly
[Guest]: in 70s, you see an angry young man.
[Guest]: And the perception, the portrayal of the police also changes.
[Guest]: And come 90s, and you see, you know, very benign capitalists.
[Guest]: So the movie Hum Aapke Hain Kaun was a story of a benign capitalist family.
[Guest]: And then it changes.
[Guest]: So I do believe that that plays a role and judges play to the gallery.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk now about street vendors itself.
[Amit Varma]: Can you sum up for me without kind of coming to present times and talking about the 2014
[Amit Varma]: law and all that, and we'll come to that later, but sum up to me the problems that through
[Amit Varma]: the decades, street vendors have typically faced.
[Guest]: So let me begin the story from the 80s.
[Guest]: You know, two cities, mainly Delhi and Mumbai had their largest share of cases on street
[Guest]: vending with before the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: And there was a case from Mumbai in 1983, Bombay hawkers union, you know, the hawkers
[Guest]: union actually challenged provisions of Bombay Municipal Corporation Act 1888.
[Guest]: If you look at this act, the provisions of this act, these were very skeleton provisions.
[Guest]: Okay, the provision did not have any details of how the commissioner will issue the licenses,
[Guest]: it only talks about terms and condition and the commissioner can issue the licenses subject
[Guest]: to those terms and condition, but it doesn't guide the commissioner as to what sort of
[Guest]: parameters should he employ for giving licenses, what should be those terms and condition,
[Guest]: nothing, no guidance.
[Guest]: And this is cardinal principle of administrative law that when the parliament or you know,
[Guest]: the legislature makes a law and delegate certain powers to the executive, there has to be some
[Guest]: guidance given to the executive, because executive can't make law, the executive can make rules,
[Guest]: but the rules are there just to fill the gaps, you know, just to fill the details, but the
[Guest]: rules can't be abused or misused by the executive to do what as per its whims and fancies, that
[Guest]: that's not permissible.
[Guest]: And the court has the power of judicial review, that if there is over delegation, or if there
[Guest]: is arbitrariness, then it can strike down those rules.
[Guest]: So what this union was doing, the street vendors challenge those provisions saying that this
[Guest]: is not guided discretion, it is unguided power in the hands of the executive, because they
[Guest]: apply for licenses, and they don't get their license, they also don't get any response
[Guest]: from the municipality.
[Guest]: And there is no deadline to give any response.
[Guest]: Now, this is purely an administrative law question, right?
[Guest]: And something similar happened with Delhi vendors.
[Guest]: So you know, there was a vendor in near Janpath called Sodhan Singh.
[Guest]: And he faced the same issue, he was given a license.
[Guest]: But when he applied for renewal of license, there was no reply.
[Guest]: The license wasn't renewed.
[Guest]: When he went to the Supreme Court, their NDMC filed an affidavit saying, well, we rejected
[Guest]: his license on so and so reason that, you know, he is supposed to be a moving vendor,
[Guest]: a mobile vendor, but he stands at the bus stop, you know, sort of like a stationary
[Guest]: vendor.
[Guest]: That's not permissible.
[Guest]: And we allowed him to sell only peanuts.
[Guest]: But he started selling garments.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, is that a material fact?
[Guest]: Why would you give license to just to sell one particular such specific commodity?
[Guest]: And what is your interest to control what commodity will he sell?
[Guest]: Of course, it's not selling bombs or ammunition.
[Guest]: It's not very clear from the judgment whether the NDMC had informed him in some timeline
[Guest]: in some deadline, you know, why they are rejecting his license.
[Guest]: And so then he can if he disagrees with those reasons, he could have challenged that reasoning
[Guest]: before the court.
[Guest]: So that's not very clear whether he challenged that there was no reply from the NDMC or whether
[Guest]: he challenged the reasons.
[Guest]: I believe it was that he did not get any response and the NDMC filed his response only before
[Guest]: the court later.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you've also given the example of Vishwanath Roy, who applied to who was a tea
[Amit Varma]: seller who wanted to sell clothes instead.
[Amit Varma]: And that went all the way to the Thareja committee.
[Guest]: And then that went all the way from basically from NDMC to the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: And that happened in 90s because there is a context to it that you know, while the Sodhan
[Guest]: Singh and Bombay hawkers union judgments, you know, were being heard by the Supreme
[Guest]: Court, the Supreme Court did not take up this judicial review question, the administrative
[Guest]: law question.
[Guest]: It abdicated from its role of doing the judicial review, and instead, it passed directions.
[Guest]: So in case of Bombay hawkers union, it asked the commissioner to frame some details as
[Guest]: to how it should give the licenses.
[Guest]: Now, the commissioner did frame some directions, you know, which he called the scheme, and
[Guest]: the court also sort of modified the scheme and passed an order with that modified scheme,
[Guest]: but also asked the commissioner to take inputs from all stakeholders and further finalize
[Guest]: the scheme.
[Guest]: This was very, very ambiguous, not something which the court should have ideally done,
[Guest]: because the court should have ideally scrutinized the provisions in the Municipal Corporation
[Guest]: Act, whether there was unguided discretion, you know, whether there are parameters there
[Guest]: or not.
[Guest]: The scheme business was not, you know, something the court should have gotten into.
[Guest]: And in case the municipal commissioner was framing a scheme, you know, he should have
[Guest]: gone ahead and framed the scheme and notified it.
[Guest]: And then the vendors could have challenged the scheme if they liked.
[Guest]: But the court shouldn't have put the scheme in its order.
[Guest]: Because once the court puts the scheme in its order, it seems the court has laid down
[Guest]: the scheme, which still is, you know, the most courts, you'll see the subsequent judgments.
[Guest]: And it seems that the court framed the scheme, and you can't touch the scheme now because
[Guest]: it's court order and whatever the court says is law.
[Guest]: And that's very problematic, because now that scheme is off judicial review.
[Guest]: So who will review that scheme now?
[Guest]: Subsequent judges won't touch it or this is laid down by the Supreme Court judges are
[Guest]: seniors and that becomes problematic.
[Guest]: In case of Delhi, NDMC, you know, told the court how this vendor has come to the Supreme
[Guest]: Court under which law, you know, where is his right to come to the court?
[Guest]: Is he saying that he has a right to sit on the road to vent?
[Guest]: There is no such right.
[Guest]: So the vendor claimed that he has a fundamental right under Article 19, 1G, right to pursue
[Guest]: any profession, business, trade, occupation.
[Guest]: And NDMC said, well, you know, how can you have a fundamental right to sit squat on the
[Guest]: road?
[Guest]: There is no fundamental right like that.
[Guest]: And the court, instead of again, reviewing the administrative law question and reviewing
[Guest]: the municipal laws, got confused with this proposition.
[Guest]: Is there a fundamental right or is there no fundamental right?
[Guest]: Now, the problem is that there is conceptual ambiguity with the court.
[Guest]: The court did not really understand that in our scheme of constitution, there is presumption
[Guest]: of liberty.
[Guest]: Citizens don't have to ask and take permissions before they do something.
[Amit Varma]: Liberty is not granted to us.
[Amit Varma]: It is assumed and the burden of proof and argument is on someone who wishes to take
[Amit Varma]: it away.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So we live in a system where the government, where the parliament, not the government,
[Guest]: where the parliament or the legislature can restrict our rights because there is a system
[Guest]: of restriction.
[Guest]: So first of all, number one, constitution doesn't give us rights.
[Guest]: The constitution declares that we have rights.
[Guest]: That's number one.
[Guest]: Number two, it gives the power to the legislature to restrict those rights reasonably and in
[Guest]: general public interest for the purpose of 19, 1G.
[Guest]: So you have two grounds, a there should be reasonableness and second is general public
[Guest]: interest.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And then a citizen can challenge those restrictions on the ground that either it is not reasonable
[Guest]: or it is not in general public interest.
[Guest]: This is precisely that the vendors were doing.
[Guest]: They were saying, of course, on the administrative law grounds that, you know, this is not a
[Guest]: law because it goes beyond the law.
[Guest]: The law doesn't ask you to, you know, and you have to have some procedural safeguards
[Guest]: on the issue of procedure, also the challenge, but they could have also challenged it on
[Guest]: reasonableness and general public interest.
[Guest]: The court, instead of asking that question, got into the question, where is the right?
[Guest]: And this is really, really troubling.
[Guest]: The court doesn't understand, you know, the way the right is coming from.
[Guest]: And these are the Supreme Court judges.
[Guest]: And this is really dangerous for the society.
[Guest]: I mean, if the Supreme Court judges are not very clear, you know, where the source of
[Guest]: the right or the concept of fundamental rights, then God save the country and the presumption
[Guest]: of liberty and the presumption of liberty.
[Guest]: So I'll give you another example.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, drone was a recent phenomenon.
[Guest]: There were no drones earlier, or for example, e-rickshaws, you know, the battery operated
[Guest]: rickshaws, battery operated rickshaws didn't come under the purview of Motor Vehicles Act,
[Guest]: but they were not cycle rickshaws either, right?
[Guest]: But the government did not have a law to ban them.
[Guest]: So the question is, is it legal to ply battery operated rickshaws or not?
[Guest]: I argue, yes, it is legal, because you don't have any law to ban them, or for that matter,
[Guest]: cryptocurrency.
[Guest]: Where is your law to ban cryptocurrency?
[Guest]: Cryptocurrency is a commodity, and you can trade in cryptocurrency.
[Guest]: But the government has gone ahead to ban cryptocurrency by way of a notification, which is not even
[Guest]: a law.
[Amit Varma]: It's not passed by Parliament yet.
[Amit Varma]: So what you're saying is, if cryptocurrency has to be banned, then Parliament has to pass
[Amit Varma]: a law that is either on the grounds of reasonableness, reasonable restrictions, or public order.
[Amit Varma]: Both reasonableness and public and general public interest.
[Amit Varma]: And then those who are affected can go to the court and argue about that.
[Amit Varma]: But it is not for the executive to, you know, without the legislature having passed such
[Amit Varma]: a law to frame a rule that is effectively a law and they can't do that is unconstitutional.
[Guest]: You're arguing.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Two questions come up here.
[Amit Varma]: One is that one of the themes through all your work, like I've read your papers and
[Amit Varma]: your articles and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I find in the facts that you lay out before us is that there seems
[Amit Varma]: to be a tremendous flouting of this whole notion of the separation of powers, that the
[Amit Varma]: judiciary should do this, the legislature should do this, the executive should do this.
[Amit Varma]: An example being in that superb sentence that you said earlier in this episode about the
[Amit Varma]: Supreme Court directing the government to pass a federal law about a municipal issue.
[Amit Varma]: And this seems completely confused.
[Amit Varma]: So does this confusion at the level of conception where, you know, the Supreme Court is legislating
[Amit Varma]: from the bench and the legislator is pretty toothless these days, but and the executive
[Amit Varma]: is doing what the legislature should do and the center is passing laws for municipalities,
[Amit Varma]: you know, is this just a fundamental problem in any change getting done even outside of
[Amit Varma]: this limited context that we're talking about today?
[Guest]: So you know, also, let's complete our chain of events, because after they passed directions
[Guest]: in Bombay Hawkers Union, in case of Delhi also, what they did in Delhi, Delhi was even
[Guest]: more weirder, because they constituted a five judge bench to decide whether it's a constitutional,
[Guest]: it's a fundamental right or not.
[Guest]: And it decided that it is a fundamental right and the parliament can restrict it.
[Guest]: And they said now the individual or the smaller benches will decide on the individual cases,
[Guest]: because Sodhan Singh was not an isolated case, they were, it was a bunch of cases.
[Guest]: But what seems in the later subsequent judgments, I found the reference to, you know, what happened
[Guest]: to the rest of cases is that they forwarded those cases to a Lok Adalat.
[Guest]: Now this is bizarre, because Article 32 of our Constitution guarantees that the Supreme
[Guest]: Court is bound to hear your writ petitions.
[Guest]: Writ petition meaning if you challenge, you know, a government action or a state law that
[Guest]: it violates your fundamental rights, the Supreme Court is bound to hear.
[Guest]: It's a guarantee.
[Guest]: It's a constitutional guarantee.
[Guest]: And the Supreme Court forwarding these writ petitions to a Lok Adalat, I think that's
[Guest]: absolutely bizarre and there is no other parallel or there is no other example to my mind.
[Guest]: I mean, imagine, you know, people would be on streets and the Supreme Court forwarded,
[Guest]: let's say the Kashmir issue or the Ram Mandir issue or the, you know, something of that
[Guest]: sort to Lok Adalat.
[Guest]: And but this is what exactly they did in 1990.
[Guest]: And after that, they started constituting committees.
[Guest]: So first they constitute a Thareja committee.
[Guest]: So they took up a civil judge from the lower judiciary in Delhi and asked him to, you know,
[Guest]: basically, it was a committee of one person.
[Guest]: And he was on the streets of Delhi, you know, counting vendors.
[Guest]: And but why are you counting vendors?
[Guest]: You know, why are you counting vendors?
[Guest]: Now, the other problem is, the court forgets that street vending is not the only private
[Guest]: use of public space.
[Guest]: There are many other private uses of public space.
[Guest]: So for example, car parking, you know, we are recording here in this neighborhood.
[Guest]: This is a residential zone.
[Guest]: And you see cars there on the road on the pavement.
[Guest]: Are these people paying to the municipality for parking their cars on the pavement?
[Guest]: No one is paying.
[Guest]: Is it legal or illegal?
[Guest]: You ask this question to municipal official, he won't also know, right?
[Guest]: So the cars are being parked in a public space without payment.
[Guest]: Is it legal or illegal?
[Guest]: No one comes to take off the cars.
[Guest]: In commercial districts, yes, that happens that sometimes the crane comes or the traffic
[Guest]: guy comes to chalan you, but that doesn't happen in the residential zone.
[Guest]: So other use, for example, the building repairing, you know, the building owner would put a scaffolding
[Guest]: and the scaffolding often is in the public area, right?
[Guest]: You have building materials lying outside in the public area, or let's say family picnic
[Guest]: in a public park, right?
[Guest]: Why people smoking outside on the road and blocking the pedestrian path, isn't that a
[Guest]: public use?
[Guest]: And for that matter, you know, we are in Delhi, barats, barat is the biggest example, you
[Guest]: don't take any public permission, the police permission or the traffic permission, you
[Guest]: know, to have a barat on the roads and the roads are jammed when there is, you know,
[Guest]: we call it in Delhi, sayabhari hai, there are a lot of marriages, weddings happening
[Guest]: on a particular night because of a shubh muhurat and the roads are jammed because of barats.
[Guest]: But no one raises any questions on these other public uses.
[Guest]: It's only the street vendor issue where there are a lot of questions.
[Guest]: So my question is, to the Supreme Court that while you frame a committee, he's counting
[Guest]: vendors on the road, but what about other public uses?
[Guest]: And while they were thinking, and of course, the one problem is that they were trying to
[Guest]: regulate street vending.
[Guest]: But the other problem is, which they shouldn't have done.
[Guest]: But the other problem is while doing that, they left other private uses of public spaces.
[Guest]: I mean, they left those unregulated, they didn't think about that.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also a philosophical question.
[Amit Varma]: And while you pointed out that the Supreme Court went into the wrong direction by considering
[Amit Varma]: whether this fundamental right exists at all, it seemed to have actually then at least come
[Amit Varma]: to the correct conclusion that yes, a fundamental right exists.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've pointed out that the government does not own the roads, the people on the
[Amit Varma]: roads, and the government is merely a trustee of the roads, right.
[Guest]: So this was also in one of those, as it said, no 50 and 60 judges gave much better judgments.
[Guest]: And this was in 55 and 57.
[Guest]: There were a couple of judgments where the court pointed out that the judgments, the
[Guest]: municipal or any government is not the owner of the roads, they are merely trustees of
[Guest]: the road.
[Guest]: So they can make regulations for better coordination.
[Guest]: But they can't oust people from walking on the road, or from applying their vehicles
[Guest]: on the road, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, the question that automatically comes up, takes me to something that the Bombay
[Amit Varma]: High Court in 2014 said, which you've quoted in one of your pieces, which both plays to
[Amit Varma]: this question and also sort of seems to articulate the common impression that most people have
[Amit Varma]: about street hawkers.
[Amit Varma]: And the court is, quote, street hawkers create dirt and nuisance, if they were to be conceded
[Amit Varma]: the right claim by them, they could hold society to ransom by squatting.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in 2017, you've pointed out how the Delhi High Court said, quote, being
[Amit Varma]: pitched between the conflicting rights of the livelihood of street vendors versus the
[Amit Varma]: life and security of the public in general, including the street vendors, we are of the
[Amit Varma]: opinion that the former must bow to the latter as without life and security, no question
[Amit Varma]: of earning a livelihood can arise, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So now, you know, just at the level of the fundamental principles involved, we would
[Amit Varma]: both agree with the judgment you cited from the 50s that, you know, public space belongs
[Amit Varma]: to the public, not to the government, the government is sort of safeguarding those spaces.
[Amit Varma]: So equally, you know, people have a right to sell things, people have a right to walk
[Amit Varma]: on those streets, we can stand together and you know, have a smoke break or whatever the
[Amit Varma]: why don't smoke and you know, the people can park their things there and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: The question that arises here is, and I'm kind of thinking aloud, is that if you're
[Amit Varma]: to take a thought experiment, where would you draw a line, because the more people sort
[Amit Varma]: of use these public spaces, each use has a tiny disruption that does not justify or is
[Amit Varma]: not a reasonable restriction of that right, to what point where where do you draw the
[Amit Varma]: line where the disruptions get so much that you say that no more this is not allowed.
[Amit Varma]: For example, if we were to take a crowd of people and completely block a public street
[Amit Varma]: outside here in Housecast where we are recording for days on end, the government would have
[Amit Varma]: to intervene because we'd be blocking all the highways and it would affect traffic all
[Amit Varma]: over the city.
[Amit Varma]: But when that happens for shorter periods of time, like say the Ganpati Emotions in
[Amit Varma]: Bombay where I live, the government doesn't do anything because it's just a handful of
[Amit Varma]: days and whatever let it happen.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one, where is the line to on what basis do you think the line should be drawn
[Amit Varma]: and is that necessarily an arbitrary distinction and three, would you agree that the street
[Amit Varma]: hawkers no matter you know, in the current dispensation, no matter what they do, simply
[Amit Varma]: do not come anywhere close to that line, they are not disrupting life in that manner.
[Guest]: I'm seeing the line can be anywhere, but it has to be a general line, a general line for
[Guest]: everyone.
[Guest]: It has to be same line for car owners, for, you know, baratis, for street vendors, for
[Guest]: cars that ply on the road, because that's also, you know, the roads are also public
[Guest]: spaces for building repairs or building construction works.
[Guest]: So it has to be general guidelines for all sort of private uses of public space, but
[Guest]: you can't say that for a particular private use, that this is the nuisance created creating
[Guest]: use and on what basis and there it, you know, smells of some sort of bias, elite bias against
[Amit Varma]: sport, there's a clear class bias here, because I, you know, I can park my fancy SUV on the
[Guest]: road all day.
[Amit Varma]: And nobody will really dare to mess with me, though, I must point out, I don't have a fancy
[Amit Varma]: SUV.
[Amit Varma]: This is purely hypothetical.
[Amit Varma]: But I could park my fancy SUV on the road all day.
[Amit Varma]: And a street vendor occupying less space than that will constantly be harassed.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, we'll have to pay rent to three sources to the police, the municipal
[Amit Varma]: authorities, and to the shopkeeper in front of who shop he might be, even though the shopkeeper
[Amit Varma]: doesn't own that space.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's basically a Coasean arrangement between the shopkeeper and the street vendor.
[Guest]: So the street vendor tries to buy his new objection, so that he doesn't complain to
[Guest]: the police and allows him to stand there.
[Guest]: Although the street, the shopkeeper doesn't own that space to the municipal officials
[Guest]: so that they don't take action against him and to the police again for no harassment.
[Guest]: But still, you know, maybe someone else, let's say RWAs, Resident Welfare Associations, who
[Guest]: are very active and powerful these days, they can complain against the vendors and despite
[Guest]: all his bribery and whatever, he can still be removed.
[Guest]: So there is still no certainty and assurance despite the bribe given.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that also strikes me is, you correctly pointed out earlier, that there
[Amit Varma]: are all these different kinds of private uses of public spaces.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if I were to give a hierarchy to them, I would actually give more importance and
[Amit Varma]: more freedom to the street vendor than to the SUV parker.
[Amit Varma]: Because the street vendor is there because he is performing a social need.
[Amit Varma]: He is only there because people want to buy from him.
[Amit Varma]: All transactions are positive.
[Amit Varma]: Some games are mutually beneficial.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, that's the logic of the market.
[Amit Varma]: He exists because he fulfills a social need, sort of a public utility, a public utility.
[Amit Varma]: The guy who parks his SUV is not fulfilling anyone's need, but his own.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so what were the sort of battles that you guys were fighting, you know, on
[Amit Varma]: behalf of the street vendors of Delhi and Jaipur, where I guess your local energies
[Amit Varma]: were restricted?
[Amit Varma]: What were typically the, you know, at a micro level, the problems that would be faced?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I guess one problem is just a problem of existence, where because you're illegal,
[Amit Varma]: you have to pay bribes to all of these people.
[Amit Varma]: So at what different levels were you trying to bring about changes to this?
[Guest]: So you know, in 2014, the law was passed, associations, vendors were very happy.
[Guest]: There was one provision in the law which said that unless there is a survey done, all the
[Guest]: vendors are counted.
[Guest]: No vendor can be evicted until then.
[Guest]: And this was a very strong provision because the way it was worded, you know, no vendor
[Guest]: shall be evicted.
[Guest]: There was a very clear direct mandate that you just can't evict any vendors.
[Amit Varma]: So just to clarify, what this means is that the government then has to mandatorily carry
[Guest]: out a survey of existing street vendors, and it cannot evict any of them once that is done.
[Guest]: Until that is done.
[Amit Varma]: Until that is done.
[Guest]: And but we got some news from Jaipur that evictions were still being carried on by the
[Guest]: municipality.
[Guest]: And we decided to visit Jaipur in January 2015.
[Guest]: We met the vendors.
[Guest]: And suddenly we got the news from a vendor that, you know, the municipality was carrying
[Guest]: on eviction somewhere.
[Guest]: And we reached that spot and they were bulldozers because, you know, in Jaipur, they call it
[Guest]: thadis.
[Guest]: So they have some sort of platform built roadside where they sell their wares and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So they were bulldozers.
[Guest]: They were heavy deployment of police forces and a lot of municipal officials were there.
[Guest]: And we saw those thadis being bulldozed, although there was a, you know, state run dairy kiosk
[Guest]: that was left.
[Guest]: They didn't do anything to that state dairy kiosk.
[Guest]: We went to a police station because as per the law, this was illegal.
[Guest]: And I asked them to lodge an FIR and they laughed at us.
[Guest]: They said, under what law?
[Guest]: I said, this is the law.
[Guest]: They didn't know about the law.
[Guest]: They said, yeh kaunsa kanun hai, humein nahi pata.
[Guest]: I said, aap kahaan par hai, Rajasthan, Rajasthan Hindustan mein aata hai ya Pakistan mein aata
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: So parliament passing a law and the police doesn't respect, doesn't care about that law.
[Guest]: We decided to then approach the Rajasthan High Court.
[Guest]: We filed a writ and lo and behold, the Rajasthan High Court decides that the law is not applicable
[Guest]: to state of Rajasthan.
[Amit Varma]: My God, on what basis do they make that?
[Guest]: They say it's not notified yet.
[Guest]: They say they acknowledge that there is a law.
[Guest]: They say Rajasthan government hasn't notified.
[Guest]: But the thing they missed is that the central government had notified it for the whole of
[Guest]: India and it was notified.
[Guest]: Then we got hold of a Rajya Sabha MP from Rajasthan and requested him to raise this
[Guest]: question in the parliament.
[Guest]: And of course, the minister, concerned minister replied that it is indeed applicable to whole
[Guest]: of India and the notification was in public domain.
[Guest]: So we took both, you know, the notification and his reply to the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: We filed a case there.
[Guest]: Ideally, the case should have been decided on the first hearing because there is nothing
[Guest]: much to be decided.
[Guest]: Yet this court took one year and after six or eight months, I think it was quite evident
[Guest]: to the state of Rajasthan and to the municipal corporation there that they will have to implement
[Guest]: the law.
[Guest]: There is, you know, no other escape.
[Guest]: So they drafted the rules and the scheme.
[Guest]: I'm not too sure if they notified it, but they probably put the draft in the public
[Guest]: domain and after vacations, the court heard the matter and they say, well, the matter
[Guest]: is now, you know, sort of, because what you were asking for, they have sort of done that.
[Amit Varma]: So it's moot now.
[Guest]: So it's moot now.
[Guest]: There is no point deciding in the matter.
[Guest]: What they did in their order is to record the statement of the government lawyer and
[Guest]: also my statement and they say that on these terms, we dispose of the matter.
[Guest]: But they did not expressly overrule the high court judgment, unfortunately, which ideally
[Guest]: they should have done, but they didn't do that.
[Guest]: Anyways, the state of Rajasthan implemented the law.
[Guest]: That was one victory.
[Guest]: Then I thought, you know, one state, we spent one year pushing that state to implement the
[Guest]: law or just frame like rules and scheme.
[Guest]: How do we deal with all the states?
[Guest]: And that's how we came up with the idea to design an index, which would be an interstate
[Guest]: index that shows which state has to what extent implemented the law.
[Guest]: And in 2017, we, you know, launched the first version of the index, then last year, we did
[Guest]: the second version, which shows that, you know, the implementation is really poor.
[Guest]: And most states have not implemented at best they might have.
[Guest]: So barring three or four states, most states have drafted their rules and schemes.
[Guest]: But in terms of constituting town vending committee, which is a participatory forum,
[Guest]: also comprising of the street vendors, almost one third have only one third towns and cities
[Guest]: have constituted town vending committees, but almost two third have not done that.
[Guest]: And then there are other steps.
[Guest]: So, for example, there should be a grievance redressal forum and so on and so forth, which
[Guest]: most cities or municipalities have not done.
[Guest]: So the law is barely implemented, right.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before we go into a break, I'll quickly read out the three features of the
[Amit Varma]: 2014 act that you point out.
[Amit Varma]: So they can then form the basis of discussion when we return to figure out how you the impact
[Amit Varma]: that that's had on the ground or the impact that's not had on the ground as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And all your papers will, of course, be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So these will be available there.
[Amit Varma]: And you say there are three features for the 2014 act, quote, one, the participatory mechanism
[Amit Varma]: of TVCs, TVCs being town vending committees, decentralizes decision making from municipal
[Amit Varma]: bodies to a committee of all stakeholders, including vendors, government officials and
[Amit Varma]: resident associations.
[Amit Varma]: The provision of 40% mandatory vendor representatives in the committee aims to ensure that their
[Amit Varma]: interests are accommodated in their party to their own governance.
[Amit Varma]: Two, until the survey and issuance of certificate of vending to all existing vendors is complete,
[Amit Varma]: no vendor can be evicted.
[Amit Varma]: TVCs are required to enumerate vendors every five years through safeguards and processes.
[Amit Varma]: The law creates a permitting framework instead of a licensing regime.
[Amit Varma]: And three, the act provides for an independent redressal committee to hear vendor grievances,
[Amit Varma]: stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll discuss this more after the brief commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to the scene and the unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen has been a labor of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although the scene and the unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: They do many, many hours of deep research for each episode.
[Amit Varma]: Besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios,
[Amit Varma]: paying technicians, the travel and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of the scene and the unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The scene and the unseen will continue to be free on all podcasts apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation, help keep this thing going, sceneunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Prashant Narang about street vendors in general and in particular the impact
[Amit Varma]: of the 2014 Act, which sort of was meant to make life better for street vendors.
[Amit Varma]: Now you've actually been monitoring how this Act is being carried out.
[Amit Varma]: Before I ask you about the implementation of the Act, let me ask you about the design
[Amit Varma]: of the Act.
[Amit Varma]: That does the way an Act is designed impact the way it will be implemented?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's a good question.
[Guest]: And this is where most of our laws fail.
[Guest]: And this is the reason why most of our laws fail.
[Guest]: There is a huge design flaw in this Act.
[Guest]: You know, this Act is titled as the street vendors protection of livelihood and regulation
[Guest]: of street vending.
[Guest]: The problem is, it acknowledges that there is some protection required.
[Guest]: Now protection against whom?
[Guest]: That's the question.
[Guest]: So if we look at the, you know, the reports preceding this Act, the reports acknowledge
[Guest]: that there is harassment.
[Guest]: Now who harasses?
[Guest]: The municipal officials and the police.
[Guest]: And why do they harass?
[Guest]: They harass because either you are, you know, you don't exist on paper, you don't have a
[Guest]: piece of paper, which is called license, right?
[Guest]: So the problem, the core problem is licensing and harassment.
[Guest]: And what is the solution that they propose to this problem of licensing harassment?
[Guest]: They propose that A, you will be counted, B, there has to be some sort of participatory
[Guest]: body to decide on certain questions of regulations and see that there will be some sort of grievance
[Guest]: redressal mechanism.
[Guest]: The problem is, who is going to constitute the body and who is going to draft rules and
[Guest]: schemes?
[Guest]: So again, the government body, you know, the state government will draft rules and schemes.
[Guest]: But the question is, if they don't, then what?
[Guest]: The local authority or the municipal corporations are supposed to constitute the town vending
[Guest]: committee, right?
[Guest]: But if they don't, then what?
[Guest]: Those questions are not answered in this law.
[Guest]: So the question is, you know, the original problem is that there is harassment by police
[Amit Varma]: and by municipal officials.
[Guest]: And that comes because of too much discretion given.
[Guest]: Too much discretion and licensing requirements, right?
[Guest]: So in the law, you say that thou shall not harass.
[Guest]: But if they harass, then what?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There is absolutely no penalty, no fine, no disincentive, no punishment for municipal
[Guest]: officials or on the police.
[Guest]: How can you solve this problem?
[Guest]: You have only created some rights and duties and you know, for street vendors.
[Guest]: But the corresponding duty on the police and on the municipal officials is missing.
[Guest]: So who bears the corresponding duty?
[Guest]: If there is a right on the street vendor to not be evicted, right?
[Guest]: There has to be some corresponding duty and some remedy if that right is breached.
[Guest]: But there is no remedy there.
[Guest]: So you expect the vendor to go every time to the court, then that's what they were doing
[Amit Varma]: in last 20, 30, 40 years.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also the some lucky vendors who had access to institutions like yours and
[Amit Varma]: lawyers like you.
[Amit Varma]: But most vendors have no redressal.
[Amit Varma]: They're just finished.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And, and it also strikes me is that the mismatch here is also, it's a question of power and
[Amit Varma]: accountability that wherever you give power to the state in whatever domain, you also
[Amit Varma]: have to write in a way to make it accountable for that power.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've pointed out, in this case, you've given them that power over the street vendors
[Amit Varma]: in the public spaces, but you haven't built in the accountability.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore what you have is, you know, any rational government service will then
[Amit Varma]: play to his self interest and use it to enrich himself and take rent.
[Guest]: In fact, absolutely.
[Guest]: And so rent seeking is a big incentive, because if you know, the all the vendors are formalized,
[Guest]: the rent seeking would stop and look at the quantum of rent seeking.
[Guest]: So you know, we speak to and there is no empirically verified figure, but a ballpark figure, you
[Guest]: know, basis on when we speak to a couple of vendors, few vendors here and there, they
[Guest]: tell us that they pay to the municipal corporation and to the police, it comes to around two
[Guest]: to 3000 rupees a month.
[Guest]: And assuming that there are 200,000 vendors in Delhi, you know, into to 2000 rupees a
[Guest]: month, I mean, calculate how much would that be, then this is per month, and multiply it
[Guest]: by 12.
[Guest]: That's the annual amount that they pay.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also sort of pointed out, like in one of your pieces, you write that, how's
[Amit Varma]: the Delhi government doing rather than just from site from your piece.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me, so the Delhi government, and you're obviously based in Delhi, has claimed that
[Amit Varma]: it is implementing the 2014 law, and it is actually doing a lot of things, but on the
[Amit Varma]: ground, that's not really working out so well, tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Delhi and Mumbai, as I said earlier, that these are the two cities where this problem
[Guest]: is acute, you know, because of the tussle for the public spaces.
[Guest]: And Delhi government notified a scheme, which because of some reasons, like Mumbai, also,
[Guest]: the schemes were stayed by the courts, and they drafted, redrafted the scheme.
[Guest]: And now they were constituting the town vending committees, and they were to conduct surveys,
[Guest]: but the survey has still not been conducted in Delhi, similarly in Mumbai.
[Guest]: So Mumbai conducted a survey in 2014, you know, under the old policy, there was a national
[Guest]: policy for hawkers in 2009.
[Guest]: And they conducted a survey, and then again, vendors approached the court.
[Guest]: The interesting part is, you know, the way Mumbai conducted the survey, they distributed
[Guest]: the application forms, and asked the vendor to submit the forms.
[Guest]: Now, this is not a survey, but they have been calling this as the survey.
[Guest]: And it fails because not all the vendors will get the form, not all of them will be able
[Guest]: to fill it.
[Guest]: Absolutely, because, you know, as per some estimates, there were some estimates say there
[Guest]: are 2.5 lakh vendors, some estimates say there are more than 3 lakh vendors, but they could
[Guest]: distribute only 1.25 lakh forms amongst the vendors, and they received 99,000 forms filled.
[Guest]: And then they had criteria, you know, who is a real vendor.
[Guest]: So you have to submit proof of vending that you have been vending in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And then you also have to have domicile certificate, which was, you know, that, of course, the
[Guest]: whole son of the soil debate in Mumbai inspires that kind of requirement.
[Guest]: And apparently, very few vendors, some figures say 5000, some figures say 15,000, you know,
[Guest]: as per the news reports, were finally able to get some sort of I cards or spaces to vend,
[Guest]: they were formalized.
[Guest]: Out of all these lakhs of vendors.
[Guest]: So imagine the figure says, I mean, some estimation says that there are 3 lakh vendors, but the
[Guest]: government distributed only 1.25 lakh forms, they managed to get 99,000 filled forms.
[Guest]: And out of those maybe like 15,000 were formalized.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially, the rest of them will have to continue to pay the haftas and the bribes
[Amit Varma]: and whatever they basically do.
[Guest]: And the rent seeking continues.
[Amit Varma]: And the sort of rent seeking continues.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'll throw in a larger question here, that you've obviously worked very intensively
[Amit Varma]: on the street vendor issue, but you also worked on other policy interventions and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What is the chief impetus towards status quo within government circles, like government
[Amit Varma]: circles are very resistant to change, and they prefer status quo?
[Amit Varma]: Is it a inertia?
[Amit Varma]: Or B, is it rent seeking?
[Amit Varma]: Because very often, what seems to me is that the people who can change the law and can
[Amit Varma]: change the system are not actually people who are collecting bribes at the local level
[Amit Varma]: themselves.
[Amit Varma]: There's nothing in it for them personally, which seems to dilute the reason of rent seeking.
[Amit Varma]: So is it some kind of inertia?
[Amit Varma]: Or is there the influence of interest groups?
[Amit Varma]: What's going on here?
[Guest]: You're right.
[Guest]: You know, at the top level, it's not so much, you know, their rent seeking incentive, because
[Guest]: that doesn't happen.
[Guest]: In this case, at least at the top.
[Guest]: I think it's lack of understanding of, you know, either the incentives, and also that
[Guest]: how this policy actually would work.
[Amit Varma]: So is it that economic way of thinking is not there at all?
[Guest]: So they think they're doing the right thing?
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: So, you know, for example, at least in this case, the ideas came from the NAC, of how
[Guest]: the law is to be designed.
[Guest]: And NAC's bias was towards more participatory forum.
[Guest]: But tell me one thing, for example, you know, that in commercial zones in Delhi, you know,
[Guest]: in the markets, you have car parking model.
[Guest]: And how it works is, the municipal corporation would auction the car parking spaces, it would
[Guest]: do an inventory of the car parking space, and it would auction the space to the highest
[Guest]: bidder.
[Guest]: The contractor, I mean, we were at SDA market, right, just now, I mean, I paid 20 rupees,
[Guest]: and he had a machine to issue a ticket and collect the money on a per hourly basis.
[Guest]: And so the contractor employs these people who collects money on per hourly basis from
[Guest]: the car owners.
[Guest]: There is no car owners committee to decide where should we park our car, there is no
[Guest]: survey of car owners, or cars, you know, who parks where.
[Guest]: This is absolutely, you know, ridiculous to think of an election.
[Guest]: And you know, the election has to happen for street vendors to be able to represent in
[Guest]: the town vending committee.
[Guest]: So a you have a participatory body, then there has to have elections.
[Guest]: And from through this elections, people will be nominated, selected to elected to the town
[Guest]: vending committee, the town vending committee will pass resolutions, and then will regulate
[Guest]: street vendors in the city.
[Guest]: And this is such an unviable model.
[Guest]: And we see this because it's been six years next week, I mean, we are recording now in
[Guest]: February third week, and March first week is the sixth anniversary of this law.
[Guest]: And it's still not been implemented in most cities, most towns, it's still not been implemented.
[Guest]: And this is the reason because it's unviable.
[Amit Varma]: And so let me ask you a question here.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to design the law, let's say that, you know, we've discussed what is wrong with
[Amit Varma]: the design of the 2014 law and how it doesn't really solve anything and the incentives are
[Amit Varma]: bad and it doesn't take economic or what I would say human reasoning into account.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to design the law differently, what would you do?
[Guest]: So two options, either you communitize the private space, public space for private use,
[Guest]: or you privatize it.
[Guest]: So the current car model is that they have privatized the space.
[Guest]: But I have sympathy for you know, because those people who have who are there, the vendors
[Guest]: who are there sitting there for many years or for decades, they have some sort of, you
[Guest]: know, customary right to that space.
[Guest]: And they trade in that space, which the government doesn't recognize, they don't even acknowledge
[Guest]: and by law, it's now made illegal that you can't transfer, but they do that.
[Guest]: And that's another point, you know, a transaction which is in conflict with law, right?
[Guest]: The government must appreciate that they should, you know, taken into account, they should
[Guest]: take into account these kinds of transactions, because it's a consensual transaction.
[Guest]: And it builds property rights.
[Guest]: And the more property rights you have, you know, it's a path to prosperity.
[Guest]: So for example, you know, one vendor that I come across, he bought a space for two lakh
[Guest]: rupees, you know, near Gautam Nagar.
[Guest]: And he's been vending there.
[Guest]: Another example is of weekly bazaars, you know, Delhi has the system of custom of weekly
[Amit Varma]: bazaars.
[Amit Varma]: Like Daryaganj book bazaar.
[Guest]: Right, that's another story, which is now removed.
[Guest]: But I will take the example of Patel Nagar's Shukar Bazaar.
[Guest]: It happens every Friday.
[Guest]: Now imagine this spot, which is only occupied by the vendor for three hours on Friday evening,
[Guest]: there is trade, there is a some sort of a property right in that also.
[Guest]: So once I approached someone asking, you know, how does one become a vendor in that Shukar
[Guest]: Bazaar?
[Guest]: And he said, you want to become a vendor there?
[Guest]: And he looked me from, you know, head to toe.
[Guest]: And I didn't say no.
[Guest]: And he said, don't worry, I'll get you there.
[Guest]: I mean, I'll get you a spot.
[Guest]: I said, but in how much?
[Guest]: He said, it will be done.
[Guest]: Don't worry.
[Guest]: I said, but in how much?
[Guest]: He said, it will be done in 75,000.
[Guest]: So imagine that spot is available for transfer.
[Guest]: If you want to buy that spot, buy, you know, I mean, I was quite surprised.
[Guest]: It's available for 75,000 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: For three years.
[Guest]: In perpetuity.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wow.
[Guest]: You can buy that spot in perpetuity and then rent it out.
[Guest]: Or probably not rent it out.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: But for example, this spot, you know, the Gautam Nagar spot for two lakh rupees, it's
[Guest]: in perpetuity.
[Guest]: Because you don't have any patna, you don't have any title, but it's in practice.
[Guest]: It's a matter of practice.
[Guest]: I know another vendor who moved from, he was actually a vendor leader who moved from Surat
[Guest]: to Jaipur.
[Guest]: And we met him in Jaipur.
[Guest]: And he spot his pav bhaji spot for one lakh rupees.
[Amit Varma]: Now my question is, who is this money going to?
[Amit Varma]: And who is enforcing this?
[Amit Varma]: Because these aren't legal property rights, like you said.
[Amit Varma]: So like, I mean, is this an sort of, is this, you know, where the state has completely failed
[Amit Varma]: and abdicated the space.
[Amit Varma]: And so therefore, these solutions are coming from within society or what's going on here?
[Guest]: No, it's, it's a consensual transaction between two consenting individuals.
[Guest]: So I occupy a spot, and I assert my property right over that spot, okay, and at some point,
[Guest]: if I want to exit from that sector, you can sell it to me, I will sell it to you.
[Guest]: The problem is why it seems to be illegal or illegitimate or in conflict with law is
[Guest]: that because the state does not recognize it, the state does not recognize my property
[Guest]: right over that piece of land.
[Guest]: So not even land, I may be wrong in saying a piece of land, but my property right, this
[Guest]: property right is not just, you know, that you own that land, but it could be your right
[Amit Varma]: to...
[Guest]: You can sell them for 3 hours every Sunday, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So now my question here, therefore, is that what seems to be happening here is that I,
[Amit Varma]: of course, agree, and we'll come back to this whole question of customary rights.
[Amit Varma]: But I, of course, agree that if you've been a vendor in a particular spot for many years,
[Amit Varma]: and that right develops, you mix your labor with the land, and you have that property
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: However, we defined it not necessarily to land, but even to sell there for 3 hours.
[Amit Varma]: And the state is being incompetent in not recognizing it.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless of that, we continue to function.
[Amit Varma]: And I might then sell that right to you.
[Amit Varma]: And presumably, at a discount to what I vote simply because there is an element of uncertainty
[Amit Varma]: built in by the state still having the monopoly on violence, and they can push you out of
[Amit Varma]: that spot anytime they want if the will is there.
[Amit Varma]: So you pay me less than what I would otherwise pay, you know, this reminds me of like, one
[Amit Varma]: of the books that changed the way I think about the world is A Mystery of Capital by
[Unknown]: Hernando de Soto.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really in the context of slums and a very influential book for so many people
[Amit Varma]: who've read it, and all of us who have been changed by it.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that points out is that you have people living in slums for years
[Amit Varma]: and decades and so on, but they don't have property rights, though they actually should
[Amit Varma]: because how you sort of gain property rights over an existing piece of land where no one
[Amit Varma]: else has property rights as you mix your labor with it, you live long enough there you trade
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually it should belong to you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's typically how these things evolve.
[Amit Varma]: But when the state doesn't recognize that they change that land into what de Soto calls
[Amit Varma]: dead capital, right?
[Amit Varma]: It is capital, but it is dead because you can't monetize it.
[Amit Varma]: So I may live in a slum and effectively own the house that I live in.
[Amit Varma]: And I've lived for three decades, and maybe I was born there and my parents were born
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: But I can't, for example, mortgage it.
[Amit Varma]: And I can't sell it to someone else.
[Amit Varma]: And what that does is that the value of the land which a piece of paper from the state
[Amit Varma]: would, otherwise, you know, all it requires is a piece of paper from the state saying
[Amit Varma]: that I own it.
[Amit Varma]: And because that piece of paper doesn't exist, the value of a parcel of land, which could
[Amit Varma]: be 20 lakhs, is effectively zero or much less than that.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a loss to society, because that person could then mortgage that land, get
[Amit Varma]: a loan to, for example, run a business, start a business, everybody benefits, society benefits.
[Amit Varma]: That's how we grow.
[Amit Varma]: And yet that doesn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: Now, does a similar analog apply, for example, to street vendors?
[Guest]: It does.
[Guest]: You are so right.
[Guest]: Because, you know, there are certain spots in Delhi, certain kiosks in Delhi that command
[Guest]: a price of 16 lakhs, 18 lakhs, 20 lakhs.
[Guest]: And I was quite surprised because the figures that I had before this was something like
[Guest]: 2 lakh rupees.
[Guest]: But now apparently there are spots that command that kind of prices and which means that these
[Guest]: vendors are not poor.
[Guest]: They are rich.
[Guest]: Yeah, but they had they can't access it, but they can't access it, but they can't access
[Guest]: it.
[Amit Varma]: That's that's the problem.
[Amit Varma]: So they struggle to pay like a 2000 rupee hafta per month to someone and they are barely
[Amit Varma]: making ends meet.
[Amit Varma]: And yet there is this value that they have, which all the state has to do is, you know,
[Unknown]: recognize it.
[Amit Varma]: You can't say granted to them because the state is not doing anyone a favor.
[Amit Varma]: That's they've performed a service to society on that particular spot for years, if not
[Guest]: decades.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And recognition of that.
[Guest]: So this law expressly prohibits transferability.
[Guest]: You can't rent out your spot, you can't sell your spot.
[Guest]: And it also says that you have no ownership whatsoever in that spot.
[Amit Varma]: So you're basically leasing a spot for personal use.
[Amit Varma]: You can't.
[Amit Varma]: No, but in the sense that's effectively what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: If you can't give it to someone else and you can't sell it and you can't rent it out, then
[Amit Varma]: you haven't really bought it.
[Amit Varma]: You don't really own it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So you've effectively just leased it in perpetuity for personal use.
[Guest]: Yeah, but the law says it's not even lease.
[Guest]: What it is, it doesn't define.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's sort of a fear that we won't even say that we have leased out to
[Unknown]: you.
[Guest]: So it says that there is no right whatsoever.
[Guest]: You can't claim any right whatsoever.
[Amit Varma]: But you pay the money and you rent it.
[Amit Varma]: But you pay the money.
[Amit Varma]: And that's quite bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, to go back to the earlier question, if I can ask you to define, so what should
[Amit Varma]: the law have been?
[Amit Varma]: Are you then arguing that what the law should have done is done a survey of the vendors
[Amit Varma]: and if they could prove they'd been there for long enough, then give them the associated
[Amit Varma]: rights, property rights, not necessarily to the land, but the property rights to went
[Amit Varma]: from there and then taken it from there.
[Amit Varma]: Is that what you're saying?
[Amit Varma]: Or how would it work?
[Guest]: I am saying, you know, just formalize them.
[Guest]: Whoever is there, respect their right and let them be there.
[Guest]: So respect the right to keep vending from there, which is like a property right of sorts.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So respect their property rights, allow them to be there.
[Guest]: So I'll give you, you know, another interesting insight from a paper written by Kettles.
[Guest]: It is a case study of MacArthur Park sidewalk vendors in the US.
[Guest]: And he gives an example across the road, you know, so this side of the road, there was
[Guest]: a formalized vending zone and that side of the road, it was unauthorized vending zone.
[Guest]: So it, you know, there was no planning for vending, but there were nonetheless some vendors
[Guest]: who were vending on that side.
[Guest]: And he compared the two.
[Guest]: He found out that in the unauthorized vending zone, the vendors that were vending there
[Guest]: had evolved their own norms of allocating spaces.
[Guest]: So there were two kinds of norms.
[Guest]: One was first come first serve basis on a daily basis.
[Guest]: So some spots that were not in much demand, and whoever comes first will occupy that spot
[Guest]: on a daily basis.
[Guest]: And there were some vendors who have been there for a longer time, and their spots were
[Guest]: sort of fixed, and they assert their property right on those spots, and other vendors would
[Guest]: not claim those spots.
[Guest]: And even if they did, these vendors would assert their right.
[Guest]: And you know, without the intervention of any police or any mafia or any gang, the disputes
[Guest]: would settle amongst themselves, which means that the, you know, that sort of understanding
[Guest]: of property rights was working very well.
[Guest]: On the other hand, this side of the vending zone, the government engaged an NGO, some
[Guest]: organization to allocate spaces, and they did, you know, draw flaws, and they tried
[Guest]: to make it aesthetically superior by saying that all the food stalls will be at one place
[Guest]: and so on and so forth, and nothing worked.
[Guest]: Many days, many times, you know, those vendors didn't even come and the government spent
[Guest]: a lot of money on the NGO, trying to figure out and make it work.
[Guest]: But it wasn't really a superior allocation of property rights.
[Amit Varma]: And what this seems to illustrate is what Hayek would call emergent order.
[Amit Varma]: What you have on one side of the road is, I mean, Hayek's whole point is that look,
[Amit Varma]: society eventually figures out frameworks and ways to work by itself.
[Amit Varma]: And what the state should do is codify that into laws.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, something drastically unconstitutional in our case, but what the sensible thing for
[Amit Varma]: the state to do is codify what works and the way things work into law.
[Amit Varma]: And if it tries to design a society from top down and put its own frameworks in places
[Amit Varma]: simply don't work and what you just described seems to be sort of a kind of a natural experiment
[Guest]: in that.
[Guest]: Would you agree with that?
[Guest]: So Kettles, in fact, cite spontaneous order, he uses that Hayekian term of spontaneous
[Guest]: order, theory of spontaneous order, and he precisely says that this works in this case.
[Guest]: And I totally agree with you.
[Guest]: You know, one way is just recognize their property rights and formalize them.
[Guest]: And second way is, you know, maybe like that car parking model, something similar to that.
[Guest]: So you privatize that resource.
[Guest]: So I am saying that, you know, instead of maybe in greenfields, you know, some new markets
[Guest]: coming up there, you can have a private, a third party contractor, but in established
[Guest]: markets and older markets, you can give that right to the street vendor association to
[Guest]: the street vendor union and ask them to pay the money, you know, some sort of fee every
[Guest]: month for maintenance or for electricity or other civic amenities like water, or sewage,
[Guest]: pay to the municipal corporation.
[Guest]: They will earn really good amount of money if they agree to provide those services.
[Guest]: And it will stop bribery and harassment.
[Amit Varma]: And does this also speak to sort of a mindset difference between how we view cities?
[Amit Varma]: For example, there is one view of cities where cities should be planned and there should
[Amit Varma]: be zones and there should be blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And you design a city from the top down.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another view that look a city grows organically and there is beauty in that
[Amit Varma]: and it may seem chaotic, but respect that organic process because everything is there
[Amit Varma]: for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the two exemplars of these different ways of thinking are, you know, Robert Moses
[Amit Varma]: who built New York City and there's a great biography of him by Robert Caro, where he
[Amit Varma]: would not look at what is happening in the local community, but flyover, acquire all
[Amit Varma]: this land, flyover, and you build a city that is grand, but which breaks down in all kinds
[Unknown]: of micro ways.
[Amit Varma]: And an exemplar of the organic way is Jane Jacobs, who wrote that masterpiece, a death
[Amit Varma]: and life of great American cities, which is an incredible book.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to get to the heart of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: But then the issue here is also that spontaneous order, which is a fundamental truth behind
[Amit Varma]: which why cities grow organically and should grow organically is very counterintuitive.
[Amit Varma]: That when people think of spontaneous order, that how can everything work on its own, there
[Guest]: has to be a designer, you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So is that then a mindset problem that is hard to get with because I am assuming that
[Amit Varma]: everyone you work with in government, doubly so because they are at they actually have
[Amit Varma]: the power to design things would have more of this planned mindset rather than this organic
[Guest]: mindset.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: And you see that in the case of Daryaganj, you know, book bazaar, it used to happen only
[Guest]: on Sunday morning.
[Guest]: And by the way, the Lord calls such markets which have been existing for more than 50
[Guest]: years as heritage markets.
[Guest]: So Daryaganj book bazaar should have gotten the status of heritage markets.
[Guest]: Instead, it was removed.
[Guest]: And in the judgment, the court does not even refer to the law, which was quite awkward.
[Guest]: I mean, they did not refer to, you know, the 2014 law, and not to this concept of heritage
[Guest]: markets at all.
[Guest]: So the mindset is not just there in the executive, it's there deeply pervading in the judiciary
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: But if the judiciary doesn't refer to the law, then does that mean they're effectively
[Amit Varma]: legislating from the bench in this instance, again, or they're taking over the power role
[Guest]: of the executive?
[Guest]: It's worse than that.
[Guest]: Because not just they are legislating, they are derogating, they are going in derogation
[Guest]: of what the parliament has legislated.
[Guest]: It's not that there is a legislative vacuum or a void.
[Guest]: There is a law in place, but you choose to not look at that and look the other way.
[Guest]: So it's worse than that.
[Amit Varma]: So where do things stand today?
[Amit Varma]: Like, this is an issue you're still working on, CCS is still working on, where do things
[Amit Varma]: stand today?
[Amit Varma]: Did the 2014 law make things better?
[Amit Varma]: Like, would you say it made things better, but nowhere by near enough?
[Amit Varma]: Or would you say that it didn't really make a difference because of the way it was designed?
[Amit Varma]: What needs to be done?
[Guest]: How likely is it to happen?
[Guest]: I'll tell you another story which, you know, a vendor's case that we came across last year
[Guest]: in August.
[Guest]: And this is another example of the interface between the Central Act and the Local Act,
[Guest]: the Municipal Act.
[Guest]: In the Municipal Act, municipality has the powers to impose chalance, okay, for violation
[Guest]: of sanitation, for nuisance, and so on.
[Guest]: And the chalance can be 50 rupees, for especially for sanitation, it's 50 rupees.
[Guest]: So last year, a vendor came to us, he was given a chalance.
[Guest]: And when he went to the magistrate, municipal magistrate, he was asked to pay 2000 rupees.
[Guest]: And you know, the vendor's nephew was quite net savvy.
[Guest]: He pulled out a judgment from Google, which said that the chalance can't be more than
[Guest]: 50 rupees.
[Guest]: And he showed that judgment to me, and I was quite shocked.
[Guest]: And then I, you know, we bought a copy of the municipal because as CCS, we don't really
[Guest]: work on municipal corporation law, we work mostly on education.
[Guest]: But we got that copy at Bayer Act.
[Guest]: And we found out that the chalance was indeed just 50 rupees written in the law.
[Guest]: And so it can't be more than 50 rupees.
[Guest]: And you know, how can the judge ask for the magistrate asked for 2000 rupees chalance.
[Guest]: And I appeared before that magistrate.
[Guest]: And he one thing, first of all, he was not aware of this law.
[Guest]: He says, you are encroaching.
[Guest]: And this is why I have chalanced you, you know, I'm imposing a penalty of 2000 rupees.
[Guest]: So you know, when the sanitation inspector issued him the chalance, it mentioned the
[Guest]: provisions for violation of sanitation norms.
[Guest]: But now the magistrate says it's for encroachment.
[Guest]: And this law 2014 law does not define encroachment.
[Guest]: There is no concept of encroachment because you are a street vendor, it's a public private
[Guest]: use of public space, how can there be encroachment?
[Guest]: And anyways, because before survey, no vendor can be evicted.
[Guest]: So there's no question of encroachment.
[Guest]: So I, you know, brought that to his attention.
[Guest]: And he said, nahi nahi aise to nahi ho sakta, aapko toh paise dene padenge, maini kab kyun
[Guest]: denge paise, where is the law?
[Guest]: I mean, it and it says 50 rupees, you take the 50 rupees, okay, we even if we confess
[Guest]: that, you know, there was some violation of sanitation, you take 50 rupees, and they were
[Guest]: happy to give 50 rupees.
[Guest]: But why should they give 2000 rupees?
[Guest]: And he was very adamant, we came back and he showed, you know, later if he showed billable
[Guest]: warrants, and then he threatened to issue attachment of property notice that will take
[Guest]: away your stuff, they'll confiscate your goods, and things like that.
[Guest]: And then we asked for a copy of the order, and the magistrate refused to give us a copy
[Guest]: of the order.
[Guest]: We asked him to, you know, inspect the court records that at least show us the record,
[Guest]: you know, very how you are passing these orders, give us a copy, we can challenge it, he refused.
[Guest]: Then we challenged it in the Saket district court without a copy of the order and told
[Guest]: the judge there that, you know, the magistrate refused to give us a copy of the order and
[Guest]: you summon that court records.
[Guest]: And she did that she passed for that order.
[Guest]: And after two days when she got the orders, the judge had signed and pass that order without,
[Guest]: you know, the accused signing the form.
[Guest]: And the appellate court, the session judge found that very, you know, surprising because
[Guest]: this is violation of the law, you can't pass an order without the accused confessing.
[Guest]: But this is what he intended to do.
[Guest]: And she sent the case back to the magistrate, and he told, the magistrate told this vendor
[Guest]: that you don't come with the lawyer, I will, you know, acquit you of all charges.
[Guest]: He said, my lawyer, whether he will come or not, you first, I mean, my submission is that
[Guest]: I have not done any wrong.
[Guest]: So then he agreed and he acquitted him.
[Guest]: Four months later, the same vendor was Chalant again.
[Guest]: And this was a different magistrate this time.
[Guest]: Again he went.
[Guest]: He says, you will have to pay a fine of Rs. 1000.
[Guest]: He said, why should I pay?
[Guest]: This is my right.
[Guest]: I can vend on the street.
[Guest]: He said, so will you sit on the road?
[Guest]: He said, yes, it is my right, why won't I sit?
[Guest]: He said, if you don't pay, I will send you to the Patiala district court.
[Guest]: You know what the vendor said?
[Guest]: The jurisdiction is with the Saket district court, not with Patiala court.
[Guest]: He said, are you trying to teach me law?
[Guest]: He said, no, I'm just saying this that the jurisdiction is here.
[Guest]: He said, then the court master whispered into the magistrate's ears, sir, he is the same
[Guest]: person who brought a lawyer last time.
[Guest]: And then the magistrate asked him, will you bring a lawyer again?
[Guest]: He said, yeah, he will come if required.
[Guest]: Then the magistrate was silent.
[Guest]: He did not impose any penalty.
[Guest]: You see, I mean, it's not, you know, maybe we say this is informal.
[Guest]: Define informality.
[Guest]: What is informality?
[Guest]: Informality is when you have a formal norm and you are non-compliant, that is informality.
[Guest]: But who is not informal?
[Guest]: Your executive is informal, your legislature is informal, your judiciary is informal, and
[Guest]: not just the municipal magistrate, right to the Supreme court, everyone is informal in
[Guest]: this country, you know, and we call the vendors informal.
[Guest]: Everything is informal.
[Amit Varma]: Every institution is informal.
[Amit Varma]: That's quite brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: It's a spin to what I always say that, you know, in the popular imagination, there is
[Amit Varma]: a sort of a dhaba on the word informality, that if you are in the informal sector, you
[Amit Varma]: are in some way there is a moral taint attached to you that you are evading the law, you're
[Amit Varma]: not paying taxes and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the point I keep making is that look, 80% of India is in the informal sector, not
[Amit Varma]: because they are immoral, or they don't want to be good citizens, but because they don't
[Amit Varma]: have a choice, because your laws are so bad, your regulations are so bad, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: is absolutely no option but to exist in what you call the informal sector.
[Amit Varma]: And in this case, what strikes me is that the vendor is not even actually in the informal
[Amit Varma]: sector, because there are laws which kind of deal with him and regulate him.
[Amit Varma]: And despite that, he has to go through this and all this while that you were telling me
[Amit Varma]: this story, I was thinking he get this is actually an outlier vendor, in the sense he
[Amit Varma]: is an outlier, because he has an access to a lawyer, which is you and you are going there.
[Amit Varma]: And despite that there is so much friction in dealing with this micro issue, you're neither
[Amit Varma]: of you, whatever judgment you get is, you know, changing the bigger picture, it's one
[Amit Varma]: micro issue.
[Amit Varma]: And this vendor is so lucky.
[Amit Varma]: And most vendors don't have this, they have to pay by hook or by crook.
[Amit Varma]: And if that 2000 fine is too much for them, then they go out of business, there is no
[Amit Varma]: choice and no one is measuring that all of that is unseen, you know, not just a damage
[Amit Varma]: to the vendor, but all the people who were buying things from him were getting value
[Amit Varma]: from him, which is also now lost to them.
[Amit Varma]: And it hurts society when sort of things like this happen.
[Amit Varma]: What do you guys do to also then change things at the macro level, key, you know, the implementation
[Amit Varma]: of the laws, the writing of the laws, you know, what's going on.
[Guest]: So index is an effort in that direction to talk about the law to have a you know, discourse
[Amit Varma]: around then you can measure it that we can measure it that it's not working.
[Guest]: Although it's my personal stand, I'm not too sure about the institutional or the organizational
[Guest]: stand on that, but I am now increasingly of the view that the law is not very viable.
[Amit Varma]: For all of these reasons, for all these reasons, yeah, right.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we've gone up in the ease of doing business rankings recently, dual questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is this even relevant to that because ease of doing business people think of a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of a formal thing where you're setting up a business and you're doing whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And two, any metric that exists can be gamed.
[Amit Varma]: And what I hear from everyone in the business space is that ease of doing business itself
[Amit Varma]: hasn't changed or become better.
[Amit Varma]: It's just that the few metrics that were there which were being measured in specific places
[Amit Varma]: have been gamed as metrics are liable to and things are still incredibly hard for businessman
[Amit Varma]: like recently, I think there was news in Delhi that you need to submit 40 something documents
[Amit Varma]: to open a business, but 19 documents to buy a gun.
[Amit Varma]: So it is easier to buy a gun legally than it is to open a business.
[Amit Varma]: And it must be, you know, even worse for street vendors, because there are so many other variables
[Amit Varma]: at play.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: The ease of doing business methodology does not even take the street vendors into account
[Guest]: for the purpose of their methodology.
[Guest]: And so, you know, they are in that kind of a gray zone.
[Guest]: Even if they're formal, they are formal, we know that they're formal, because there is
[Guest]: a law governing them, regulating them and protecting them.
[Guest]: But for all those purposes, they don't exist.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So what is their ease of doing business, it simply doesn't matter.
[Guest]: Although I mean, I'm glad that the Prime Minister, given his background that he was himself a
[Guest]: street vendor earlier, and he talked about, you know, the pakora walas, and so on and
[Guest]: so forth.
[Guest]: So I was quite hopeful that things will probably change.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, it's to that extent, I have not seen that kind of a change.
[Guest]: And the law definitely, though it was passed by the previous government, but this government
[Guest]: hasn't done really anything to reform the law.
[Guest]: It's still going at its own pace.
[Amit Varma]: And can you briefly tell me a little bit about the political economy here?
[Amit Varma]: Who are the people pushing for change?
[Amit Varma]: And more importantly, who are the interest groups who are against change happening?
[Amit Varma]: Like, it seems to me that everyone would be better off if, you know, street vendors are
[Amit Varma]: given the respect that they deserve, which all other small businessmen should also have,
[Amit Varma]: I was about to say do, but should, you know, a lot of this reform doesn't actually seem
[Amit Varma]: to really harm anyone except the local level municipal guy or the policeman who's getting
[Amit Varma]: the bribe.
[Amit Varma]: But they are not really powerful interest groups, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what are the interest groups?
[Amit Varma]: What are the forces that militate against this sort of change happening?
[Guest]: I think one of the, you know, disincentive is that most vendors are not the local citizens.
[Guest]: So they are not voters for the political parties.
[Guest]: That's one crucial factor at play.
[Guest]: And this is why it doesn't become a political issue.
[Guest]: In Mumbai, it does become a political issue, because, you know, then it's about son of
[Guest]: the soil issue and that all the Zonka Bakar stalls should go to the local people and not
[Guest]: to migrants.
[Guest]: But otherwise, in other cities, it's not really that kind of a political issue.
[Guest]: I think it's more a mindset issue.
[Guest]: Because for example, in Jaipur, you know, the establishment thinks that they make the
[Guest]: city look ugly.
[Guest]: It's an aesthetic problem.
[Guest]: But if you know, another thing which they probably don't understand is that once you
[Guest]: formalize it, then investment will flow into it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Provided that you don't have poverty mandating laws.
[Guest]: So poverty mandating meaning, you know, the law has another condition.
[Guest]: So one condition is that you can't transfer.
[Guest]: The second condition is that you can't have an alternative source of employment, which
[Guest]: means, so for example, three MBA students called me up to say that we want to put up
[Guest]: a food truck.
[Guest]: They can't, you know, because then they have to show that they're poor or they don't have
[Guest]: any alternative source of employment.
[Guest]: A retired government bureaucrat once called me to say that I want to put up a food truck
[Guest]: in Noida.
[Guest]: What is the law?
[Guest]: This is so ambiguous, a person who wants to really invest money, you know, a food truck
[Guest]: would it's not a handcart or something like that.
[Guest]: But our mindset is street vendor.
[Guest]: It means a poor guy clad in dhoti and, you know, kurta pushing a cart or something like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: No, you know, your kiosks in T3 terminal, they're also street vendors.
[Guest]: As per the law, the kiosk in the Supreme Court, you know, there is a guy who sells lawyer's
[Guest]: band and stationery in the corridor of the Supreme Court.
[Guest]: He's also a street vendor.
[Guest]: But this kind of understanding is absent.
[Guest]: We are conditioned to see street vending in a very narrow and conditioned perspective.
[Guest]: That has to change.
[Guest]: Street vendor does not and many street vendors, I can tell you, I sold my last car, you know,
[Guest]: my old car to a street vendor.
[Guest]: And he paid me money in white, I mean, he, you know, paid the money, transferred the
[Guest]: money through bank account.
[Guest]: And street vendors are not poor.
[Guest]: Not all of them are poor, at least.
[Guest]: Number two, they can become rich only if you don't, you know, force them to remain poor.
[Amit Varma]: If you don't mandate poverty.
[Guest]: If you don't mandate poverty.
[Guest]: The problem with our laws is you're mandating poverty because we love poor so much.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that, you know, at the risk of repeating ourselves that I would emphasize
[Amit Varma]: that if a street vendor exists, if somebody starts a food truck and it takes off, it only
[Amit Varma]: happens because it is providing a service to society.
[Amit Varma]: People want it.
[Amit Varma]: People are willing to pay for it.
[Guest]: People feel that their lives are better off.
[Guest]: And it will also create jobs.
[Guest]: And it will create jobs.
[Guest]: The other thing our law says that you can't employ people.
[Guest]: You have to be there at the store yourself or your family.
[Amit Varma]: Are you serious?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you can't employ people.
[Amit Varma]: So you can't employ people, you can't scale up, you can't monetize your debt capital as
[Amit Varma]: it were.
[Amit Varma]: It's just absurd.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when you spoke about in a couple of cities, the reason that there's resistance
[Amit Varma]: to change is also that the street vendors don't have any political power because they
[Amit Varma]: are migrants.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of brought to my mind the question that is a lot of the popular opposition to
[Amit Varma]: street vendors also comes out of a kind of xenophobia that these are migrants, these
[Amit Varma]: are not our people.
[Amit Varma]: Like in Bombay, they might well say ki UP Bihar se aare hai and do those kind of prejudices
[Guest]: also sort of play into this?
[Guest]: Always, always.
[Guest]: So in Mumbai, it could be prejudices against the migrants because they are bhaiyas from
[Guest]: UP Bihar.
[Guest]: In Delhi, it could be because many of them are Dalits or Muslims and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: There are all kinds of class biases.
[Guest]: And again, the aesthetics, you know, ki yeh toh dikhne mein achhe nahi hai, they're making
[Guest]: the city dirty.
[Guest]: This is one thing that I hear in my RWA meetings and on my RWA, you know, the WhatsApp groups
[Guest]: that they are making our neighborhood dirty.
[Guest]: So that elite sense of, you know, the cleanliness.
[Guest]: And how do you respond to it?
[Guest]: You know, so there are counter voices, for example, in my RWA, which is all dominated
[Guest]: by men, they sort of legislate that the vendors cannot enter into the neighborhood.
[Guest]: And you know, it's kind of a now a gated community.
[Guest]: And I said, you have to ask women, do they not want vendors?
[Guest]: First of all, I mean, that's another issue of legality, you know, whether you can oust
[Guest]: the vendors like that, because it's a public road, we are not a cooperative housing society
[Guest]: like Mumbai or Gurgaon or Dwarka.
[Guest]: This is a public road, you can't ban the entry of another person, as per your whims and fancy.
[Guest]: And the women, you know, they protested, they said, we want the vendors, why are you not
[Amit Varma]: letting them come in?
[Amit Varma]: It's easier for us to buy vegetables or buy whatever, why should we go somewhere else?
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of and, you know, again, time after time, in the seen and the unseen over
[Amit Varma]: the many, many episodes that I've done, I will find that a lot of issues I discuss also
[Amit Varma]: have another aspect to it, gender, which somehow, sometimes even I'm guilty of missing out on
[Amit Varma]: which is an invisible aspect.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as you point out, in this case, and I'm so glad you brought it up, that that's
[Amit Varma]: also an aspect that you have this bunch of men getting together with the Residence Welfare
[Amit Varma]: Association and not even caring about that, you know, the women might have different needs
[Guest]: and different incentives, and we should take that.
[Guest]: And when they talk about encroachment, you know, so first, you also have to see are the
[Guest]: shopkeepers not encroaching, and what is your strategy to stop that kind of encroachment?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you even define encroachment?
[Amit Varma]: Because if it's public property, what is encroachment?
[Guest]: You know, if the RWA putting up gates and barriers is also encroachment, exactly, right?
[Guest]: You parking your cars outside, that's also encroachment.
[Guest]: So it's always you know, the pointing fingers at the other.
[Guest]: So the othering of street vendor is also prevalent, be it othering in terms of you know, the migrant
[Guest]: or in terms of the religion or in terms of caste, but there is othering.
[Amit Varma]: So that this class othering is also so sort of dominant, not just...
[Guest]: This is why those judges, you know, when they say that they'll hold, vendors will hold the
[Guest]: society to ransom.
[Guest]: This is othering.
[Guest]: Himachal High Court, I mean, Himachal High Court says that these people come from outside
[Guest]: to Shimla to, you know, to vent, they can't.
[Guest]: He denied protection under that clause, you know, no vendor can't be evicted unless the
[Guest]: survey is done.
[Guest]: Himachal High Court refused to protect those vendors saying that these vendors can't claim
[Guest]: protection again, under the law, because they are outsiders.
[Amit Varma]: From elsewhere.
[Guest]: From elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Well, law doesn't say that.
[Amit Varma]: So it's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: It's incredible how so many like, you know, public policy is supposed to treat everyone
[Amit Varma]: equally and is supposed to be blind to all of this.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting how, you know, so many of these biases and prejudices play into
[Amit Varma]: the way public policy itself is designed.
[Amit Varma]: And even the sort of core principles, which, you know, sometimes go into frame.
[Guest]: And it's not designed this way, but it is the way it is being enforced also, the biases
[Amit Varma]: are...
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean, one would argue that if it was designed properly, then there would be less
[Amit Varma]: scope for these biases to play out, right, if there were better sort of protections and
[Amit Varma]: safeguards and government was also sort of held accountable.
[Amit Varma]: So listen, I'm a big admirer of your work, but I'm also I also sort of think I learn
[Amit Varma]: a bit from the way that you think.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you, you know, a final question before we end this episode, which is more
[Amit Varma]: general, which is that, you know, at the start of this episode, I asked you if your approach
[Amit Varma]: to the law and the Constitution was sort of shaped by your background, which is not an
[Amit Varma]: elite background, where you're looking at it from top down, but you're, you're a trader
[Amit Varma]: yourself and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that that question takes on far more relevance now, after all these
[Amit Varma]: years of experience doing all of this, where you look at the law, not just as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: all these statutes and notifications that are written somewhere, and you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you download the document, but you have to deal with them on a daily basis, you've argued
[Amit Varma]: all these cases in courts of law, and you've seen close up how these laws and how our Constitution
[Amit Varma]: itself, in fact, impacts the lives of ordinary people who do not have the sort of privileges
[Amit Varma]: that we do.
[Amit Varma]: How has this over the years changed the way you look at both the law and our Constitution?
[Guest]: You know, because I was brought up that way.
[Guest]: So I could think that way.
[Guest]: So for me to now think otherwise, that had I not been from a family of traders.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not asking for that counterfactual, but I'm saying that, that notion, your understanding
[Amit Varma]: of the law, not your knowledge, but your understanding of the law should would have been strengthened
[Amit Varma]: by this sort of interaction with it.
[Guest]: Is that the case is what I'm asking?
[Guest]: That's certainly the case.
[Guest]: You know, the, I see a difference, the way I approach or I look at economic restrictions
[Guest]: vis-a-vis other legal scholars do and there is, you know, a huge difference.
[Guest]: For them, the other fundamental rights are much more sacrosanct.
[Guest]: I don't believe any hierarchy of fundamental rights, which a lot of people, other people
[Guest]: claim that there is a hierarchy of fundamental rights and on that have fictional hierarchy.
[Guest]: Freedom of speech and expression is at the top.
[Guest]: And but you look at the number of cases, you know, the writ petitions right from 1950.
[Guest]: So you know, there are search engines for lawyers wherein you can look for cases.
[Guest]: A simple exercise, just type article 19-1A and look for what results you get and type
[Guest]: article 19-1G, which is the economic freedom right.
[Guest]: So 1A refers to free speech and 1G refers to economic freedom, right?
[Guest]: You probably would get twice or thrice the number of results for Supreme Court and also
[Guest]: for high court cases for 19-1G, right?
[Guest]: That definitely shows something.
[Guest]: Next to Rohit Desh's book, but Rohit Desh's book is more a qualitative work.
[Guest]: But I'm talking about now, you know, some sort of numbers.
[Amit Varma]: The data itself.
[Amit Varma]: The data.
[Guest]: And there are many more cases pertaining to 19-1G, right?
[Guest]: And people go to the courts, you look at, for example, the cow slaughter cases, right?
[Guest]: Now for each cow slaughter law, when it is challenged in the court, you have 4000, 5000,
[Guest]: 10,000 members of Qureshi community, you know, challenging it in the court, right?
[Guest]: And when these people say, when other legal scholars say that, you know, right to religion,
[Guest]: for example, is a higher right than economic freedom.
[Guest]: But you know, these things are, there is sort of intersection between these things.
[Guest]: Your economic freedom intersects with your identity, right?
[Guest]: So you can't see these things in isolation.
[Guest]: You know, when there is a law which impinges on your freedom to, let's say, deal in beef
[Guest]: or a deal in meat, it impacts your identity.
[Guest]: When a law, you know, that taxes a commodity, let's say, Parle-G biscuit, I've heard Shruti
[Guest]: on your podcast, you know, imposes a higher tax on Parle-G than on diamonds.
[Guest]: Then also it impinges on your identity as a consumer.
[Guest]: Often there are patterns of consumption and production.
[Guest]: So for example, hypothetically, let's say, government imposes higher tax on coffee than
[Guest]: on tea.
[Guest]: Okay?
[Guest]: Who will it impact?
[Guest]: It will impact South Indian coffee producers, as well as South Indian coffee consumers,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And more tea drinkers are consumers are in North, and the producers may be in Northeast,
[Guest]: I mean, there is a pattern, right?
[Guest]: All that I'm trying to say.
[Guest]: So to say that one right is above the other, because, you know, of so and so, and these
[Guest]: people probably have never vended, never done any sort of business, they are probably there
[Guest]: in the universities taking a salary, I'm saying just one day, stand in the street and do street
[Guest]: vending, or earn money and start a business and try to earn money, then you will be able
[Guest]: to appreciate, you know, a the right and as well as the daily struggles of other people,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Unless then, until then, you have no right to say that freedom, freedom of speech and
[Guest]: expression is your vested interest, because you write, you express yourself, but what
[Guest]: about, you know, the livelihood right of other people.
[Guest]: So very interesting, you know, when there are when there were cases that involved intersection
[Guest]: of free speech and economic freedom, you know, for example, in cases where a newspapers building
[Guest]: was to be acquired, or the machinery was to be acquired or things like that, or, you know,
[Guest]: there was some restriction on your right to sell newspaper or right to acquire newspaper,
[Guest]: then both rights intersect, right?
[Guest]: Then how do you perceive this right?
[Guest]: So it's easier to say that one right is important over the other.
[Guest]: But unless you ask the person who is in that shoe, you can't make a universal claim for
[Amit Varma]: everyone.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'm a freedom absolutist, I think there should be none of these restrictions
[Amit Varma]: on either of these rights, and we should treat them all equally.
[Amit Varma]: Prashant, you know, thanks so much for coming on the show and learnt a lot from you today
[Amit Varma]: and more part of what you do in future.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do read some of Prashant's writings, which
[Amit Varma]: are linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Prashant on Twitter at law underscore ET underscore AL, law underscore
[Amit Varma]: ET underscore AL.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.